is there something you could know that
would change the way you feel
just kidding hammer magic lemma a
jellyfish
so I guess mathematical analogies
slightly less odious than sports
analogies you know we've been talking to
a mathematician lately and so my best
friends are mathematicians okay in a
recent video spontaneously I just said
look you know it's a real difference
between math on the chalkboard and then
math how we use it in real life in
making moral and political arguments
yeah there is something similar to be
said about philosophy I've had videos in
the past the relatively remote and
distant past talking about like what
does it mean to have a philosophy why
would anyone bother to have a philosophy
the other day I was talking to you about
philosophy of language is it even really
possible to have a philosophy Atlanta
one but look people come to philosophy
because they want to change and I think
the most basic premise are the most
basic unstated assumption of philosophy
is that there is a connection between
knowing and feeling like if I change
what I know I can change how I feel and
that I can change how I act so an easy
one would be cowardice like I'm gonna
have a kind of philosophical examination
of what it is I feel afraid of and then
I'm gonna overcome cowardice a much more
difficult one I think would be jealousy
right and we've talked a lot about
jealousy on this channel I seem to be in
a small minority of people who don't
feel jealousy
you know we don't study math for the
sake of filling up the chalkboard with
numbers yeah how it can be applied yeah
we do need to solve problems right yeah
presumably problems in our lives if not
what kind of problems you know many
problems in someone else's life there's
like maybe to something else maybe you
want to land a spacecraft on the moon
but nevertheless you want to solve some
kind of problem
yeah right yeah and I mean you know why
do we why do we come to philosophy I
think that's really the sincere answer
is that we're trying to solve problems
and there with philosophy they're
problems that lie outside of you know
other other provinces yeah no yeah I'm
sorry I mean the other day you did
record I think you you know made two
attempts was a which is unusual for you
to record a video about your philosophy
of language and I think there was some
disconnect when I was trying to you know
just take in what you were talking about
talking about with philosophy of
language cos no I mean some of these
concepts are foreign and that's why I
like foreign to me and that's partly
wouldn't would you man to your channel
because I didn't know about all these
right I just didn't even know the extent
yeah it's not easy yeah it's not what
it's not yeah you do make it look easy
I mean it's challenging it's challenging
to number one whoo I'll do a real real
quick real quick thought experiment so
this is a very crude example but you'll
see why use it let's say you had a
soldier who was terrified he was
cowardly he was experiencing fear on the
battlefield and you asked him okay look
let's do a thought experiment what would
what what could you know if you could
know something that would reassure you I
make you feel fearless that make you
feel afraid what would you need to know
here's a really depressing answer that
unfortunately has thousands of years of
evidence back yet maybe the soldier
would say to you oh well if I knew that
it was impossible that I would die
though or that if I died I've given him
moral life yeah that it's only an
illusion
that there is no death or maybe if you
told me that I'm special then everyone
else could happen to me that there's an
exception to the rule yeah then maybe
maybe they're very impervious to the
swords of other uh or hey I'm gonna give
you an amulet I'm gonna give you this
special name you're gonna wear around
your neck and that you know so maybe
something totally false like this so
maybe there is something you could know
that would change how you feel
depressing but maybe a conversation
worth worth having okay if your problem
is jealousy you know what is it that you
could know that way no I don't think
that you know you don't have to upload
the zero you don't want to you know your
ex-boyfriend took the her boyfriend
Judith performing took the approach of
telling you that you are the most
beautiful woman in the world yeah and
that's really giving you this ambulant
he really told you you were the most
beautiful in the world and nobody else
is trying to you know and what jealousy
isn't just about appearance I mean you
can be you're the most intelligent
you're the you're the most special that
is told or that wants to build himself
up build up his confidence by saying I'm
immortal or I'm the special one yeah I
think he knows it's not true you know if
you really believes in mainstream
religion like Catholicism or Islam you
know right I mean this is yeah you're
right you're right I was just going to
compare it in the same way I knew even
though my ex my former partner my export
was telling me this and it's not true of
course that's one some well ya know of
course I wasn't diluted about that it
was to him you know just just believe it
like I believe that to him I was like
his ideal you know so that made me right
that made me feel calm like more
confident right uh but ya know I mean
what is it that
would make you feel less - what is it
right so in terms of my not feeling
jealous by the way um remember some
forty years old yeah I maybe started
learning Chinese at 36 I mean try to
figure it out right so there are all
kinds of white men who started learning
Chinese at sixteen right
I'm never gonna compete in their level
now I do get a lot of compliments like
oh wow you know what your Chinese is
very precise it's you know I do get a
lot of compliments on on how well I know
or how well I can use Chinese whether
it's on my handwriting am i
understanding the language right and
that reflects different things about my
character and the other language they
study before but I've studied a series
of languages home I'm never I'm never
gonna be the best at Chinese and you
know I've told you I had conversations
of professors where it is said them look
you must realize I'm never gonna be a
like I'm never really a Chinese
literature professors and this is
ridiculous look at her oh yeah
it's not possible for me to compete with
native speakers of the language like
interpreting Saturday morning cartoons
in Chinese which believe me is a lot of
what goes on in Western Asia via anime
dominates Asian Studies what a lot of
people presume to be a source of ego for
me or egoic fortitude or whatever on the
contrary I can regard in a Down earth
way as being kind of perpetually
humiliating I'm perpetually just do no
personal and I'm cool that I'm not
jealous of people who are you know so
you look this is the difference between
religion and philosophy if we ask the
soldier what do you need to know to feel
fearless and he doesn't care if it's
true or false okay magic amulet you'll
go to heaven after you die and you're
special okay that's religion okay if we
actually want to solve the problem if we
actually want real it's the problems we
care about there is that your fault
then it's not religion any more than its
philosophy you see yeah well that's not
a problem right like you fight so this
is good
even if the solution were for my
girlfriend's jealousy to tell you don't
worry babe you're the most beautiful
right yeah like you are not somebody who
like I'm not your ideal I don't think
you're that great a musician either I
wouldn't tell you the greatest musician
well I had fun we did one music video we
could do it you know I wouldn't I don't
lie to people that way
I don't why are you that way yeah I'm
not right I'm not the most beautiful I'm
not like I grew up right right I know I
know you said I'm not ugly of course
this is my question
so given this whole background what what
could you know believe me I'm assuming
we don't really have an answer is there
something you could know that would
change the way you feel
okay so when I first was starting
University like and I would go on tumblr
like there's this general undercurrent
of telling everybody that they're
beautiful
we're so like that's what I'm saying you
would need to know like that you're
beautiful like no matter what like like
that's King to me that's the most
ridiculous thing oh I agree a real
answer
but you know even you know even if you
look within your own family so I come
from a big family you know your cousins
and stuff too
yeah I can't say you know all your
cousins are equally beautiful I can't
say all my brothers and sisters are
equally beautiful it's ridiculous I mean
okay if you say people say it on tumblr
and that solves the problem but that's
what I'm asking them I ask you to
actually solve the problem okay
I'm not ask you to lie what do you think
so the problem okay talking about uh
sensation what would you have to know
that would actually change how you feel
what's knowable what's possible
how can knowing change feeling in
relation Josey look I knew a guy and
won't say who it was he was a white
American and he had his bicycle stolen
by a group of black people African
Americans and he really got racist
obviously he probably was inclined to be
racist to some extent before I don't
know okay uh you know and that's
conversation you can have with people
many of you watch this was where we
talked through with someone look I know
when you had this a bad experience etc
what do I have to tell you how are we
gonna break this down so you don't blame
millions of people for the actions of
whatever was four or five guys like can
I talk through with you like you know
maybe it is the simplest oh yeah you
know I had my bike stolen once it was by
white people huh what am I gonna do now
go through the rest of my life for the
chip Marshall forget swiping you know
are you gonna be able to talk that
through as a thought experiment is there
something he can know that's gonna
change the way he feels not something he
believes right no it's not not like a
logical tenant right you know my father
talked about this before of mentions on
the channel the idea of attitudinal
learning an attitudinal change you know
what if what I'm trying to do is not
burden you with a series of specific
dates from history I want to change your
attitude towards the history like you
know oh I didn't realize like in the
history of Canada really the wars
between the French and English they were
five decisively by native people this is
an early period of our history we're
really what mattered were indigenous
people and their role in history as
mercenaries and stuff later there's an
attitude shift and why do you want to do
that because in Canada we have a lot of
people a lot of white people who say
that native people didn't contribute
anything to the history of the country
it's very commonly said in Canada you
know what's so you know okay so you want
to change this attitude can knowing this
change the way you feel there for some
people it can't right and I think that
shows something too so like if you have
the same conversation about racism
the one guy puts the bad experience
black people somebody else who has
veterans native people
I think if you can't if you get to the
point where you say no there's nothing I
can tell you there's nothing you can
know that's gonna change the way you
feel right I mean maybe at that point we
finally are talking about you know
insanity we're talking about a kind of
pathology you know
I guess what you'd have to know is that
everybody's experience is different
everybody's conditions is are different
when you know when you come into this
world and what you put into your life is
what you're what you will get from get
out from it and life is unfair I mean
like I can think of ways to change the
way that I would feel you know change my
feelings of jealousy know in a recent
video I said that my own philosophy you
know it's it's it's like being aware all
the time that your house is on fire and
then asking well you know how can you
how can you be watering the lawn how can
you be enjoying life when you know your
house on fire and even if it's not your
house on fire there's somebody else's
hostess on fire this sense of any kind
of self-indulgence needing to be
justified now by the way just real brief
example I even filled with book one at
the gym like I feel like lifting weights
up to a certain point is justified by
the sense of preparedness of being able
to go out and put out fires cope with
emergency situations cope with the
problems the world like I can't you know
I can't make a positive contribution to
this the suffering in the world if I'm
not in a certain level of physical
condition myself yeah you know but I
mean I gave you the example the other
day of a handsome guy on YouTube um
believe me inoculating his whole career
is being a handsome guy and dating a
model when her whole career is just
being a beautiful woman that's all they
do so in some ways their lives have been
made easy by being born beautiful born
and raised beautiful however you want to
put it when I actually look at them so I
watch one of their videos for the
reasons not worth describing I actually
feel a lot of sympathy
like you know I don't I don't feel
jealousy but like I see their lives as a
struggle I see a lot of sorrow and
suffering and hard work in their lives
and even like the two of them as a
couple and you know the you know maybe I
see their lives as a struggle you know
like III don't know I mean you know for
me in terms of what I know and and how I
feel I do think that a really really
deep sense that life is suffering you
know it's the same with like when I talk
to left wingers who hate the rich you
know sometimes like you're someone
having a couple numbers I've talked to
people who are left-wing or communists
you ask them you know do you do you
really know what life is like for the
rich like do you really think they're
happy like do you really think they're
kind of dancing on the graves of the
working people like do you know what
it's like to be a factory owner like
have you thought about it
if you really you know you can watch a
film like you know their their lives are
also full of tremendous sorrow and
suffering and struggling you know you
know I'm not that I'm saying it's equal
nothing saying it's the same and of
course you can take an example of
someone starving in the most extreme
poverty and then someone living in the
most extreme wealth but most
entrepreneurs most people who even have
over a million dollars their lives have
terrible sorrow and suffering you know
in South Korea there was a commonplace
statement there was a name of a young
woman and she was born the daughter
actually I think I do remember the core
I'm not going to name the corporation
she was born the daughter of a
multi-million multi-millionaire
corporate director corporate CEO and her
whole life was miserable and she
committed suicide and you know there was
some series of tracks she living up to
it but her name in South Korea became
synonymous with people would say look
you know like the rich have problems too
you know whatever it is even if you want
to use something corny like heart
attacks and cancer and stuff you know is
it easier for the rich well yeah you
know I just say you know that that kind
of jealousy
you know again I'd like to think that
for most people most of the time it can
be challenged by knowing just knowing
more about what's on the other side of
that divide like do you think maybe
knowing more about you know the lives
it's may sound absurd but maybe knowing
more about the lives of beautiful people
I don't know like I said to you before
and you were surprised but you you said
you know that your whole life is so much
easier if you're just born beautiful and
I said well yeah it's also more
dangerous you're a target for rape you
know from a very early age you know I
mean you you're a target for violence
your target for jealousy you can expect
them in topic here other people or can
be cruel to you and demanding and so on
in some ways your life is life is easier
but you know and we know people whose
whole intellectual potential has been
snuffed out by the fact that they're
good-looking not going to name names you
know people where it's had a destructive
effect in their lives and this is
discussed in Plato to a limited extent I
remember uh medieval source castiglione
a the book of the courtier it's actually
an ancient and medieval topic of debate
to what extent are beautiful people evil
because they're corrupted by society
into what extent are they evil because
they're evil
because they're it's in their nature and
what most of the debates conclude is
that Society has such a powerfully
corrupting effect on beautiful people
that you know beauty the power gives you
in society corrupts so to speak you know
that that you can never really know how
importantly how is hardly evil beautiful
we belong is this such a this is such a
powerful warping factor you know yeah
well I I want to stay on topic but you
know I don't know I watched it when we
were just with your daughter right I was
like having this you know she was being
really sweet and loving with me and
you know we were just having like a
having a moment and I was kind of like
rubbing my like I was rubbing her hair
like I was running my fingers through
here and I said your hair is so
beautiful like you know I was kind of
just just being sweetness joking around
and I was like oh one day maybe it could
be a hair model you know and I really
was thinking like you know what there
really are like terrible like I wasn't
you know saying but yeah I regretted it
saying it later because this no you
really thought this isn't something you
should say to a kid I remember yeah yeah
yeah no you just say to a kid and it I
do I do wonder from a young age how you
approach this inequality and I think
what you said here is very true if you
think of the other side and use
philosophy as a problem-solving tool and
well at least at least we'll come to a
very distinct knowledge of what the
problem using sympathy as an analytical
tool to think about the other side yeah
I I get what you're saying and when you
think of it when I think of it that way
it it definitely changes my perspective
we will see jealousy has been a huge
issue on this channel since day one it's
been a huge issue in this relationship
so maybe this is the first of many
sequels to come
[Music]